¿Dónde será?
Sus tías en la escuela. Ah, sí. Esa familia venía,
vino de otros estados. Y esa familia estaba vecina
con nosotros. Ellos desmontaron ese lugar.
Nosotros estábamos como aquí. Esa familia llegó y
compró el lugar. Era monte. Enfrente de nosotros.
Eran el papá y la mamá. Y dos muchachas, que eran sus
hijas de ellos. Bueno, ya los señores estaban poco
grandes. Esas muchachas eran muchachas ya
mayores, nomás que ellas nunca se habían casado.
Esas muchachas, ni nosotros ni ellas entendían,
pero era buena familia. Then, as chance would have
it, she said she was going to be a teacher. Nosotros
conocíamos por mi papá, ese señor que vive también
por ese camino, le decían Steary Well. Ese señor
era un trabajador y era un señor solo, americano. Y
él, yo no sé cómo se hacía entender con mi papá, pero
pues sería por sus modos. Él tenía muy buenas
amistades con la gente. American. And that man
also looked for my father a lot. This boy, he was
already a big boy, but he hadn't been married.
Those girls arrived there for new ones. They liked
it. So these girls went out for a walk. I saw that
they dressed very well. And those boys came and
took them for a walk. And my father would say, this
is Tiri Güell, he says, he's taking the girls for a
walk. And I would hear my father talking. And they
would go. And another time they would say, they
would go to a carnival with them and everything.
Then the other sister got married to another boy,
also of an older American age, who was called
Güelle. Willie Hatchick. Willie Hatchick. Sí, yo
no sé, será apelativo, yo no sé, pero así le decían a
él, el Willie. Entonces, ella salía con ese
muchacho, la otra muchacha. Then came the time
that she went to school. And I was her friend,
because we were neighbors. She said, you here? And
I said, my friend, yes. Oh, she was very pleased.
Well, what do you think? What I learned, my memory,
I think my memory has been very bad. Well, I don't
think it's that bad because I'm saying all this,
but now I've always lost it. Well, then she gave me a
book. You know the books that were there before.
Look, this story was the story that I learned. I
learned to do the first numbers because I never
knew anything. The 2, the 5, I only know up to the 60.
Yes, I know them all. But the ones I have the most are
the 80, 60. Well, I was learning that because she
taught me. Then she gave me a little book and I
started writing letters. Well, I did write them
and I did learn. And she told me, I learned them in
English. Maybe if I had followed, I would have
learned. So I told them in English. Well, I always
kept them. Los conocí, los conozco, y conozco
todo, y sé leer español poquito, y bueno, pues yo
estuve un mes en la escuela. Entonces me dio un
librito que decía mi acuerdo, lo sabría de
memoria, pero no, lo supe leer y conocí las letras,
y donde este era un niño, y ese niño se trataba de su,
yo creo que, of what he, his name, and Yasina,
right? And he was called Will. Well, and I said,
this is Will, how do you do, Will? That's the story
he had, and she told me that. And how do you do, May?
How do you do, May?
And she, well, so I said, Well, no. Since my mother
got sick, when I was in school for a month, I had to
leave school. Then they took me out of school
because she had babies of all sizes, and I left
school. I think, I was liking it because I was
resting there. I was there, well, you know the
classes at school. It was a little difficult for me
when they are like this, they put them like this.
See? Yes. Uh-huh, the numbers. And I think I was
practicing. Well, it was very little time for me to
do all that. So, My cousin, I asked my cousin and she
asked me what to do. I said, no, because then I won't
know if you make them for me. She said, well, so you
can make them soon. She said, yes, but I don't know
then. Well, but since the time was so short, I
didn't learn much. I learned a few words only. Yes.
Bueno, siempre agarré palabras de saludar de
Asina, pocas palabras. Pues me retiré entonces y
allí nos fuimos.
Entonces vino la guerra muy dura. La guerra. Hubo,
yo creo, sería por la guerra o sería por... that
there was destruction, or I don't know what the
cause would be. The story is that they reduced our
food a lot. We had to sweeten the coffee with brown
sugar. They didn't have to give us flour. My
father,
because I barely remember, because very few took
us through that big street that goes straight to
the sea. There was a small shop, very small, and
those were Arabs. And those Arabs were the ones who
served my father food, with and without money. And
because of so much knowledge and a lot of family,
instead of giving it to my dad in secret, I think, I
don't know, they would give him a grain of flour. It
was all they could give my dad, a grain of flour,
because there was no flour. And if there was, they
wanted to send it to other states. So what they did
was a lot of corn flour. They gave it to my father
because the family was big. A lot of corn flour. And
now, before, you didn't know how to make corn
bread. You made it. I didn't make it, my mom made it.
My mom only made it because that man, Jose Jan, gave
my dad a lot of Guaramilk. And that bread, my mom
beat it with a lot of Guaramilk. And then, some pans
that had legs and a... A lid, they would put embers
on top of the lid and they would put the corn bread
inside that pan. And then below, they would put
embers and they would put that pan there. And that
pan would cook there. If you would put a little
heat, the golden breads would come out, but they
would come out hard. They didn't come out as fluffy
as these. Well, because they didn't have the
subtleties that these have now. Naturally, for us
it was a very good bread, because we didn't know
them anymore. But it was very good, and that was
what we did. Yes, we got tired of eating it. pero no
nos morimos de hambre porque había mucha harina de
maíz y mi mamá nos hacía los panes. Y en esos
sartenes, que ahora todo tiran a la basura, todo lo
de años atrás lo tiran a la basura porque ahora todo
es moderno, pero es más mejor lo que pasó than what
we have now. Yes. Both in the health of the person
and in the things that are useful. Yes. Because
what we had before was very... everything was very
well built. Yes. From everything to everything
and even in the person. Yes. Because now the person
is like como todos los que hay ahora. And it has a lot
of people, a lot of medicine, a
lot of... a lot of... a lot of use that has happened
now, both in people, in food, and in everything.
It's more modern, but now people die more than in
the past years. Yes. And there weren't the tools
that there are now. And in the past years, Años
pasados no había lo que hay ahora. Y ahora se muere
más la gente porque ahora andamos más recio de
todo. Y por eso uno no vive en paz. Uno vive la
carrera y por eso se muere más pronto. Porque vive
la carrera. Bueno, entonces, esto de mi...
Terminó en esto que de la escuela, al poco tiempo
nos fuimos de ese lugar, de esa familia.
Nos fuimos como el veinti...
Como el veinti...
Como el veinticinco, yo creo, de ese lugar. Pa'l
rancho ese de José Yaliga.
We changed everything. I think two trips to Guayín
took my father to that place. Because at that time
that man was a very fat man. He was an American man. I
don't know what race he was of. But he had his own
customs. And his appearance made me think he was a
Mexican. He was a fat man. His mustache was very
black, a very colored man, a very fat and tall man,
owner of many mules, many cows, a very large ranch
that he had, and here is still his ranch. Well, he
had another ranch in Sandias. He planted a lot of
sandias there. And he used a lot of cowboy hat. And
he was very Mexican. His whole family, because he
had big boys and girls and everything. His oldest
girl was called May. and very good to his whole
family, and a very good boss that he was with my
father and everything. So, I don't know how my
father would fix it there, but my father had a lot of
land. He said that for cotton, for cabbage.
So, My father would take care of the cows in the
farm. Every morning, at 3 or 4 in the morning, my
father would be there, taking care of the cows in
the farm. He would take a lot of milk to the house.
The others would get up to have lunch with the
mules, so that when they all went to work, those
mules would have lunch before going to work. All of
them. You could see the line of pure men working.
So... At that time, my brothers worked. My two
brothers and my father. There were three brothers
who were already working. My brothers earned a
very good salary. It was a good salary, I say, in
those years. They earned money. They earned one
peso per day. So there were three of us. mis tres
hermanos, pero no sé si el peso por hora o el peso por
día, pero más bien era el peso por día. Bueno, tres
pesos ganaban porque eran tres. So we would get up
at four in the morning to make them lunch. They
would be ready for lunch when they got up. When they
were playing, when it was dawn, my brothers and my
father were already at the edge of the field.
Because in California they call it fil, here we
call it labor. Well, that was early in
the morning, early in the morning. Then, you know,
my father sowed the first year and he got a lot of
cabbage. And since I was the eldest and my two
brothers and my father, my mother never worked. My
mother was always at home. No, I never worked.
Well, then, I...
I don't know what would have happened to me. My
mother didn't tell me why. I think she didn't know.
I knew more. I wore my
brothers' pants. My father told me, we are going to
cut cabbage. We are going to start cutting
cabbage.
Soon I got ready. and we would go, we would stick to
the cart, each of us would grab our knives, there
were four of us. Here was the cart, do you know what a
cart is? It's a box. And then two wheels. Two
wheels. And then a mule. Or a horse, whatever it
was. And here you were cutting the cabbage and here
you were throwing it. Here goes the other one
cutting the cabbage and throwing it. See? And the
horse walking. So we would go out, fill up, and make
cabbage. And my brothers and I, I think that's why I
like the ball. Because if I was down, I was here, my
brothers and I would throw a lot of cabbage, and
cabbage, and cabbage, and cabbage, and cabbage.
And well, that was the job we did. The whole season
of cutting the cabbage, we would cut it. So my dad
made a lot of money. Then my dad said he was going to
buy a truck of the Ford that was used in those years.
He bought a Ford, a new Ford truck, because my dad
always liked to buy, but good. So he bought a truck
of those. But what I didn't like was the color,
because he bought it in black. Everything in black
and black. But it looked very pretty. My father
laughed at it. We didn't laugh at it, not even my
brothers. My father was a driver. And then it
changed. We, the people, there were two people who
had a car. My father bought that truck. But our
first friends were, they lived, they were John Doe
workers. It was the Cuellar family. They bought
Mr. John Donne's car. It was a Dodge. That was Mr.
John Donne's car. It would be his first car, I don't
know. So he bought another car, a more modern one,
and he gave the car to that family. So they were...
the family called them the rich because they
already had a car and they called them the rich. So
when we bought that truck, we were the richest
because that's what they called us because we
didn't have any friends yet. Only the Gonzales
family had a truck. Well, then we didn't go to
Guayina anymore, to Corpos. We would do half a day,
one day to get to Corpos. But the whole family would
go to Guayina. You see? My father, like me, I
imposed on my family. My father would take us all
and say, let's go to the store. It was a store that
was, I think it was also Arabs or Italians or I don't
know. By the way, I don't know, it's here on this big
street too, which is the one that has always been
full of bodies, that street. And my father took us
there. And there, that's every year that there was
money. There he would take us and he would take us
all and he would say, he would take my mother and he
would take us all. They take everything you want,
everything you need to buy. So, Well, we didn't
know what color we could look for. We just liked
whatever it was and we bought it. My mom didn't tell
us anything. She didn't... Mom, we like it, it's
good. My dad, it's good. He just took us to choose.
So... I used to buy and pay my dad a lot, because it
was for everyone. I used to buy chestnuts, beans,
everything I needed. I used to pay together, but
only in one store. It was all there. So, for so long
that I was a little older, eh, este, el señor es el
dueño de la tienda. Tenía yo toda la confianza y
decía, Lupita, es muy desgustada. Ándale,
Lupita. Come in here and look for all the shoes you
want. Come on, you check the shoes you like,
because you are very disliked. Well, check all the
ones you like. Well, I went in there to look for the
shoes I wanted. He says, you Lupe, you are very
disliked, you are never going to get married. He
says, because you, look, you don't like anything.
Well, I already checked them. Do you like those?
Yes. Well, we left. We left. So, I don't know how
many years we lived
there. I went back, my sisters, my mom, I helped her
a lot. The years that I lasted, because I lasted
little, but the years that I helped my mom, I worked
since I was very young helping her. I understood
about my sisters, about combing them, bathing
them, ironing them, All the time my sisters were
very clean. So my father said, The sewing machines
arrived, so my father came and said, do you like the
machines? The man from the machines said to me. I
said, yes, I like them, but my father is not here
right now because my mother could no longer do
anything. So I already knew a little about sewing
with the neighbor. with the neighbor. A lady had a
machine and she told me, come sew here so I can teach
you. Well, I already knew a little sewing. So she
tells me, oh, my father is coming. Well, I'll wait
for him. My father arrives and since I was the girl
who helped him a lot, both my father and my mother,
So, he tells me, his father is coming and his
daughter wants a machine. So my father tells my
mother, hey, do you want a machine? And my mother
says, Well, no, he says, why do you want this
machine? Why do you want a new machine? It costs a
lot. He says, why don't you better buy a used one so
that it can be taught? And then my father says, no.
He says, if she wants a machine, it's better to buy
her a new machine. And then I told him, I already
know how to sew. I told him, if you want to buy me a
machine, Dad, buy me a new machine. I do want a
machine. He said, yes. Do you want the new machine?
Yes. Well, my mom didn't say anything anymore
because she said, no, it's better to buy her a new
sewing machine. So I said, I already know how to
sew. Well, then let's buy it. And then they bought
me a new sewing machine. My dad didn't buy it, it
didn't cost the machine anything more than, it
seems to me, 100 pesos. It didn't cost much in those
years of that Singer. On that machine, I didn't let
my mom sew. Because we sewed by hand. We sewed
everything by hand. My mother taught me how to sew
by hand, but she wanted me to sew very well, like a
machine. And if I didn't sew well, I did sew well. I
knew I sewed well, but she didn't like it. She would
say, sew it well again. Well, I sewed it again. I
sewed it again. So when they bought that machine
for me, I sewed for my mother, because my mother
gave the clothes to sew, they charged 50 cents for
sewing the clothes, but it was not money, because I
sewed them. So they say, So I sewed everything in
the machine, I didn't let her sew everything. I cut
her dresses and sewed all her dresses
in the machine. So from there we went back to the
same place where we had been born. Because that
Italian family had already left their place. They
had already gone to another place because they
were already old men. But all of these places are
close to here, to Corpus? Yes. Yes, they are close.
Yes, yes, all of these, where we have lived, yes,
everything is close here. Yes, in the Nueces
County. Yes, it's in Condado de Nueces,
everything I'm talking about. Everything is in
Condado de Nueces. Yes, yes. You never lived
there. I didn't know anything about Robestown.
No, you didn't come to California or places like
that. Well, you know that now, since I got married,
since I got married, I've been to other states.
Yes, but in the past. Ah, not in the past, no. I've
been here since my dad... Y toda nuestra familia
aquí estuvimos, todo el tiempo aquí estuvimos,
porque él nunca salió de aquí. Bueno, entonces
volvimos a regresar para atrás. Le volvieron a dar
el mismo lugar a mi papá de tierra. But then we were
better off because we already had a truck. And then
my brothers, who were my two brothers, my father,
who is in this place where he bought the machine for
me, he bought my brothers two horses, beautiful
horses, and two Because they wanted to ride horses
and they couldn't
buy so
many cars. But horses, yes. So my brothers, each
one went out to walk on their horses because they
lived here. They had to come here where they had
their friends and my grandmother. So here was my
grandmother and my grandmother. They would come
on Saturdays and they would be here and they would
go back until Sunday afternoon. That's why they
wanted their horses and very good chairs. So when
we came back to that place, I was 16 years old. My
older sister was older, but she was I was with my
grandmother, she had been raised with my
grandmother, the sister who followed me. But
since she was already old, she wanted to be next to
us. Because she was not forced to be alone, just
with my grandmother. And here in my house there
were many little sisters and I was the oldest and
she had never been with us. She said, I want to be
with mom. I don't want to be with grandma anymore.
But when grandma was alone, mom left her there. But
my mom wanted her to leave and my sister didn't want
to go. Poor thing, she was alone in the mountains.
She wasn't well. She didn't want to be there. So
that house was as big as this one. of the Italian
men, of Mr. Rosas. So, that's where we lived. I
think I was about six years
old, six months old, when I thought of getting
married. So, So I came back and I thought about
getting married.
Naturally, when you're a father, you feel bad. I
was the first one. My father was very mortified and
very hurt, but my father didn't say anything. But
he did feel bad. The one who told my mother and the
one who told my father was her. So I got married. El
27. ¿En qué modo encontró con su esposo? Mi esposo
era de...
Él era de México. From Mexico? From which part? He
was from Monterrey. Yes, his whole family was
there in Monterrey. And he passed with papers to
this side. And here he was. There he was working in
that ranch too. There he taught himself to work.
And well, in that ranch I met him. And one, I don't
know, one no longer thinks, there are things that
one doesn't think about when one is still old. And
there are still things that one doesn't think
about. In what year did your husband come to the
United States? I think he came around... I think it
was around... I'm not very sure, but I think it was
around...
I think he came around... around 23, 24. 23, 24. I'm
not very sure. For what reason? For what reason did
he come? Oh, well, he came for the same reasons that
there is not much life there because the jobs are
not like here. Not many have the opportunities.
Now there are many opportunities. In those years
there were not the opportunities that there are
now. Now there are people who are very poor. Now
there are people who don't have a school. Now there
are people who don't have education. It's because
they don't want it. Now they have all the
opportunities. And Mexico too? Mexico, yes,
there are also opportunities because I have been
to Monterrey, I have been to Monterrey twice. And
now that I have been alone with my children, I have
been twice before. And I have seen that there are
very poor people, but most of the people have their
jobs, and very good jobs that many people in Mexico
have. The poorest people have very good jobs to
maintain themselves. Because they sell their
things that they sell, very pretty, and any of
those things need to be studied. And they have
them, that's why they learn them, and that's why
they make their lives. But I'm going to tell you
that Mexico, as you know, I only know it because
I've heard it and because they tell me about it. But
yes, Mexico is very rich. As they say, Mexico is
sitting in gold. But yes, What's the point of me
being very rich and having the money saved here?
You don't put it to work for the poor. You don't put
it to help your own people. No. You want to have it.
You use it a lot. You just think about being well. In
having everything, only you. You have
everything, you don't know about the others. And
that's what I see, that it's not right. Because
having your money, why don't you put it to work? So
that that family doesn't suffer, the poorest one
like you, doesn't suffer. put it to work and you
will see how there is no poverty. Even if it is a
little, like here when the United States started
to pay little by little, but people knew how to
support themselves. Well, there should have been
Like those who have so much money, put them to work
so that those poor people don't suffer. Many of
those people have died, many, in these states.
Why? Because there are many who have a lot of family
and they don't have to keep them. And that's why
they come to these places. because the money is
saved there from those who have it, they don't give
them what they lack. That's what I take badly
there. And Yacina is, because I say on my part, I
have gone a little, here to Laredo, here to Laredo,
this to Monterrey, Yo tengo todo esto que no uso. Yo
fui la otra vez. Yo llevé como cuatro o cinco
paquetes. Yo los anduve repartiendo allí a esa
gente que está de atiro pobre. Yo no lo necesito. Yo
se los llevé a ellos. Porque a mí, yo no quiero tirar
esto y tirar lo otro. Nosotros tenemos abastecido
aquí, gracias a Dios. Bueno. We don't like it
anymore. We don't like this food anymore.
Everything. No, if God punishes us too. That's not
good. If you go... Look, there are times when I have
penises. I'm collecting penises, penises,
penises. I have many penises, or nickels, or
whatever. I carry many nickels in my wallet. I take
them out with all the people I see who need nickels.
I give it to them. I'm not going to be richer if I give
a nickel and a dime. That's not going to help me. No.
What I have is good. I don't envy anyone. I don't
envy anything. Because I don't have those years. I
don't envy anything. Nothing good. I go there, I
tell you, I give away all the packages, packages,
packages of clothes, of what I carry there. I give
it to the poor people. I give the money to the poor
people. That's why I carry what I carry loose to
give away. I am here, where I can earn a nickel. Yo
aquí estoy, yo hago mis costuras, yo hago mis
delantares, yo hago horquilleros. ¿Yo puedo
ganar un peso? Allá no. Esa gente no tiene, no tiene
dinero para comprar un pedazo de material porque
no lo tienen. Bueno, entonces, yo si lo tengo,
ahorita no lo tengo, al ratito lo tengo y allá no.
¿Ves? Porque ellos no tienen con qué ponerse a
trabajar, monchos. And
that's what makes a lot of money. It's like me, I'm
doing very well here, I have everything here.
Those people need a piece of bread, and I'm eating
it. I don't need poverty, I'm not in poverty, I'm
not in anything. I'm living very peacefully and
everything. I don't know about the others. And
that's what's not good. That's not good, and I'm
not right about that. So, I got married on the 27th.
I got married. Well, I got out of my house well
because I didn't think about it. It was hard for me
and all that. I thought, my mom and dad put in four
months for me to get married. Well, I waited
because I said, if they don't say yes, well, I'm
going to stay. So,
the year came, my little boy. He is now 40 years old.
He is the oldest and he is in the service. Well, nine
of my family came. There are nine of my children.
Five men and three women.
So I... The first time I went to the West, I went here
nearby. The first time I went out, it was with my boy
when he went to the service. Because my boy said,
Mom, I'm going to go to the service. He said, he
registered when he was 18 years old, which was when
the war was. In this second war. The World War II.
The World War II. Then he told me, Mom, we've never
gone out of here. And I want us to go to Las Piscas
this year, he said, because I'm going to leave next
month. So I had my bad dad, and I had my mom and my
grandparents who had died. Mi abuelito murieron
el 37, murió mi abuelito. Y el 45 murió mi abuelita.
Y el 45 mismo se fue mi muchacho al servicio. Pues
que entonces yo,
cuando yo, Cuando yo me casé, yo pensé nunca irme de
fuera de ellos. Porque yo pensé todo el tiempo, si
yo me casaba, estar todo el tiempo al lado de ellos.
Pero entonces cuando yo, mi muchacho me dijo que me
fuera, mi papá estaba malo. Y yo fui y le dije a mi
papá que yo me iba a retirar de aquí. Y que me iba a ir.
to the north. So my father says to me, well, I'm
happy that you're leaving with your family,
because I know that you're not having a good life.
And maybe you can get a little better so that the
boys can help you and you can leave. Well, I didn't
feel very good leaving because my father was sick.
But my Lord had promised me all the time that He
would never take me out of my parents'
side. But He never knew this. But that's how it was.
He did fulfill what He told me. But because of Him, I
lost my father because I never saw him again.
Because on that trip, I lost him. But who caused it?
Well, it was him. Because if he had seen the states
with so many people at ease, I wouldn't have left
this state. So we went. Thank God, we went back.
I never received a telegram from my father. I never
heard from him. Until I was on the ground, I knew
that my father had died. It was impossible to come
because they had buried him. So I went back. My son
had the opportunity to go to Monterrey. to see his
uncles, because his whole family is there. Yes.
Then he said, Mom, give me money to go see my uncles.
Yes. And he went with his cousin to Monterrey. A
week passed and he came back. Then he went to the
service. Then the second one stayed, the one who
followed him. Que fue mi muchacho.